Graphic User Interface FAQÂ¶
General GUI QuestionsÂ¶
What GUI toolkits exist for Python?Â¶
Standard builds of Python include an object-oriented interface to the Tcl/Tk widget set, called tkinter. This is probably the easiest to install (since it comes included with most binary distributions of Python) and use. For more info about Tk, including pointers to the source, see the Tcl/Tk home page. Tcl/Tk is fully portable to the macOS, Windows, and Unix platforms.
Depending on what platform(s) you are aiming at, there are also several alternatives. A list of cross-platform and platform-specific GUI frameworks can be found on the python wiki.
Tkinter questionsÂ¶
How do I freeze Tkinter applications?Â¶
Freeze is a tool to create stand-alone applications. When freezing Tkinter applications, the applications will not be truly stand-alone, as the application will still need the Tcl and Tk libraries.
One solution is to ship the application with the Tcl and Tk libraries, and point
to them at run-time using the TCL_LIBRARY and TK_LIBRARY
environment variables.
Various third-party freeze libraries such as py2exe and cx_Freeze have handling for Tkinter applications built-in.
Can I have Tk events handled while waiting for I/O?Â¶
On platforms other than Windows, yes, and you donât even
need threads!  But youâll have to restructure your I/O
code a bit.  Tk has the equivalent of Xtâs XtAddInput() call, which allows you
to register a callback function which will be called from the Tk mainloop when
I/O is possible on a file descriptor.  See File handlers.
I canât get key bindings to work in Tkinter: why?Â¶
An often-heard complaint is that event handlers bound
to events with the bind() method
donât get handled even when the appropriate key is pressed.
The most common cause is that the widget to which the binding applies doesnât have âkeyboard focusâ. Check out the Tk documentation for the focus command. Usually a widget is given the keyboard focus by clicking in it (but not for labels; see the takefocus option).