Python support for free threadingÂ¶
Starting with the 3.13 release, CPython has support for a build of Python called free threading where the global interpreter lock (GIL) is disabled. Free-threaded execution allows for full utilization of the available processing power by running threads in parallel on available CPU cores. While not all software will benefit from this automatically, programs designed with threading in mind will run faster on multi-core hardware.
Some third-party packages, in particular ones with an extension module, may not be ready for use in a free-threaded build, and will re-enable the GIL.
This document describes the implications of free threading for Python code. See C API Extension Support for Free Threading for information on how to write C extensions that support the free-threaded build.
See also
PEP 703 â Making the Global Interpreter Lock Optional in CPython for an overall description of free-threaded Python.
InstallationÂ¶
Starting with Python 3.13, the official macOS and Windows installers optionally support installing free-threaded Python binaries. The installers are available at https://www.python.org/downloads/.
For information on other platforms, see the Installing a Free-Threaded Python, a community-maintained installation guide for installing free-threaded Python.
When building CPython from source, the --disable-gil configure option
should be used to build a free-threaded Python interpreter.
Identifying free-threaded PythonÂ¶
To check if the current interpreter supports free-threading, python -VV
and sys.version contain âfree-threading buildâ.
The new sys._is_gil_enabled() function can be used to check whether
the GIL is actually disabled in the running process.
The sysconfig.get_config_var("Py_GIL_DISABLED") configuration variable can
be used to determine whether the build supports free threading.  If the variable
is set to 1, then the build supports free threading.  This is the recommended
mechanism for decisions related to the build configuration.
The global interpreter lock in free-threaded PythonÂ¶
Free-threaded builds of CPython support optionally running with the GIL enabled
at runtime using the environment variable PYTHON_GIL or
the command-line option -X gil.
The GIL may also automatically be enabled when importing a C-API extension module that is not explicitly marked as supporting free threading. A warning will be printed in this case.
In addition to individual package documentation, the following websites track the status of popular packages support for free threading:
Thread safetyÂ¶
The free-threaded build of CPython aims to provide similar thread-safety
behavior at the Python level to the default GIL-enabled build.  Built-in
types like dict, list, and set use internal locks
to protect against concurrent modifications in ways that behave similarly to
the GIL.  However, Python has not historically guaranteed specific behavior for
concurrent modifications to these built-in types, so this should be treated
as a description of the current implementation, not a guarantee of current or
future behavior.
Note
Itâs recommended to use the threading.Lock or other synchronization
primitives instead of relying on the internal locks of built-in types, when
possible.
Known limitationsÂ¶
This section describes known limitations of the free-threaded CPython build.
ImmortalizationÂ¶
In the free-threaded build, some objects are immortal. Immortal objects are not deallocated and have reference counts that are never modified. This is done to avoid reference count contention that would prevent efficient multi-threaded scaling.
As of the 3.14 release, immortalization is limited to:
- Code constants: numeric literals, string literals, and tuple literals composed of other constants.
- Strings interned by sys.intern() .
Frame objectsÂ¶
It is not safe to access frame.f_locals from a frame
object if that frame is currently executing in another thread, and doing so may
crash the interpreter.
IteratorsÂ¶
It is generally not thread-safe to access the same iterator object from multiple threads concurrently, and threads may see duplicate or missing elements.
Single-threaded performanceÂ¶
The free-threaded build has additional overhead when executing Python code compared to the default GIL-enabled build. The amount of overhead depends on the workload and hardware. On the pyperformance benchmark suite, the average overhead ranges from about 1% on macOS aarch64 to 8% on x86-64 Linux systems.
Behavioral changesÂ¶
This section describes CPython behavioural changes with the free-threaded build.
Context variablesÂ¶
In the free-threaded build, the flag thread_inherit_context
is set to true by default which causes threads created with
threading.Thread to start with a copy of the
Context() of the caller of
start().  In the default GIL-enabled build, the flag
defaults to false so threads start with an
empty Context().
Warning filtersÂ¶
In the free-threaded build, the flag context_aware_warnings
is set to true by default.  In the default GIL-enabled build, the flag defaults
to false.  If the flag is true then the warnings.catch_warnings
context manager uses a context variable for warning filters.  If the flag is
false then catch_warnings modifies the global filters list,
which is not thread-safe.  See the warnings module for more details.
Increased memory usageÂ¶
The free-threaded build will typically use more memory compared to the default build. There are multiple reasons for this, mostly due to design decisions.
All interned strings are immortalÂ¶
For modern Python versions (since version 2.3), interning a string (e.g. with
sys.intern()) does not cause it to become immortal.  Instead, if the last
reference to that string disappears, it will be removed from the interned
string table.  This is not the case for the free-threaded build and any interned
string will become immortal, surviving until interpreter shutdown.
Non-GC objects have a larger object headerÂ¶
The free-threaded build uses a different PyObject structure.  Instead
of having the GC related information allocated before the PyObject
structure, like in the default build, the GC related info is part of the normal
object header.  For example, on the AMD64 platform, None uses 32 bytes on
the free-threaded build vs 16 bytes for the default build.  GC objects (such as
dicts and lists) are the same size for both builds since the free-threaded
build does not use additional space for the GC info.
QSBR can delay freeing of memoryÂ¶
In order to safely implement lock-free data structures, a safe memory
reclamation (SMR) scheme is used, known as quiescent state-based reclamation
(QSBR).  This means that the memory backing data structures allowing lock-free
access will use QSBR, which defers the free operation, rather than immediately
freeing the memory.  Two examples of these data structures are the list object
and the dictionary keys object.  See InternalDocs/qsbr.md in the CPython
source tree for more details on how QSBR is implemented.  Running
gc.collect() should cause all memory being held by QSBR to be actually
freed.  Note that even when QSBR frees the memory, the underlying memory
allocator may not immediately return that memory to the OS and so the resident
set size (RSS) of the process might not decrease.
mimalloc allocator vs pymallocÂ¶
The default build will normally use the âpymallocâ memory allocator for small allocations (512 bytes or smaller). The free-threaded build does not use pymalloc and allocates all Python objects using the âmimallocâ allocator. The pymalloc allocator has the following properties that help keep memory usage low: small per-allocated-block overhead, effective memory fragmentation prevention, and quick return of free memory to the operating system. The mimalloc allocator does quite well in these respects as well but can have some more overhead.
In the free-threaded build, mimalloc manages memory in a number of separate heaps (currently four). For example, all GC supporting objects are allocated from their own heap. Using separate heaps means that free memory in one heap cannot be used for an allocation that uses another heap. Also, some heaps are configured to use QSBR (quiescent-state based reclamation) when freeing the memory that backs up the heap (known as âpagesâ in mimalloc terminology). The use of QSBR creates a delay between all memory blocks for a page being freed and the memory page being released, either for new allocations or back to the OS.
The mimalloc allocator also defers returning freed memory back to the OS.  You
can reduce that delay by setting the environment variable
MIMALLOC_PURGE_DELAY to 0.  Note that this will likely reduce
the performance of the allocator.
Free-threaded reference counting can cause objects to live longerÂ¶
In the default build, when an objectâs reference count reaches zero, it is normally deallocated. The free-threaded build uses âbiased reference countingâ, with a fast-path for objects âownedâ by the current thread and a slow path for other objects. See PEP 703 for additional details. Any time an objectâs reference count ends up in a âqueuedâ state, deallocation can be deferred. The queued state is cleared from the âeval breakerâ section of the bytecode evaluator.
The free-threaded build also allows a different mode of reference counting, known as âdeferred reference countingâ. This mode is enabled by setting a flag on a per-object basis. Deferred reference counting is enabled for the following types:
- module objects
- module top-level functions
- class methods defined in the class scope
- descriptor objects
- thread-local objects, created by threading.local
When deferred reference counting is enabled, references from Python function stacks are not added to the reference count. This scheme reduces the overhead of reference counting, especially for objects used from multiple threads. Because the stack references are not counted, objects with deferred reference counting are not immediately freed when their internal reference count goes to zero. Instead, they are examined by the next GC run and, if no stack references to them are found, they are freed. This means these objects are freed by the GC and not when their reference count goes to zero, as is typical.
Per-thread reference counting can delay freeing objectsÂ¶
To avoid contention on the reference count fields of frequently shared objects, the free-threaded build also uses âper-thread reference countingâ for a few selected object types. Rather than updating a single shared reference count, each thread maintains its own local reference count array, indexed by a unique id assigned to the object. The true reference count is only computed by summing the per-thread counts when the objectâs local count drops to zero. Per-thread reference counting is currently used for:
- heap type objects (classes created in Python)
- code objects
- the __dict__ of module objects
Because the per-thread counts must be merged back to the object before it
can be deallocated, objects using per-thread reference counting are
typically freed later than they would be in the default build.  In
particular, such an object is usually not freed until the thread that
referenced it reaches a safe point (for example, in the âeval breakerâ
section of the bytecode evaluator) or exits.  Running gc.collect()
will merge the per-thread counts and allow these objects to be freed.